Public and student-led anti-government demonstrations are being held throughout several cities in Indonesia. They were launched on 17 February 2025 by the All-Indonesian Students' Union (BEM SI), together with individual students' unions. 

According to the central coordinator of BEM SI, Herianto, the alliance had called for protests all over the country on 17 and 18 February (cancelled at Jakarta), while they would hold the protest centrally at Jakarta on 19 (cancelled) and 20 February. The Civil Society Coalition had also called for civilians to participate in demonstrations on 21 February following Friday prayers. BEM SI projected that around 5,000 students would participate in the protests, and they also threatened further actions if the government does not react positively.

The second wave of protests began in March 2025 following the ratification of newly-revised Indonesian National Armed Forces Law, which increased the number of civilian positions that soldiers are allowed to hold, from 10 to 14. Generally, most of the protests were held in front of the building of respective legislatures (national or regional), with its participants usually having worn black clothing, marked by the burning of used tires and clashes with policemen.

 Background 
left|thumb|"#Adili Jokowi" graffiti in Janti, Sleman Regency, Special Region of Yogyakarta, 7 March 2025
thumb|Presidential Instruction Number 1 of 2025, released on 22 January 2025

 February protests 
The protests occurred as a response over controversial policies by Indonesian president Prabowo Subianto and his vice-president Gibran Rakabuming Raka, which include the  (MBG) programme and the enactment of Presidential Instruction Number 1 of 2025, which led into massive budget cuts, supposedly to fund the free nutritious meal programme. The nickname  itself originates as a hashtag popular on Twitter (X). According to Beautynesia, the hashtag had been used by more than 760 thousand tweets, but within 24 hours, this number has increased up to 14 million tweets. While according to coordinator of BEM SI, Satria Naufal, it represents "the fears, worries, and well-being of the citizens". Digital research company Jangkara found that during February 2025, the hashtag has received 81% negative sentiment, followed by 13% neutral and 6% positive, based on their analysis on 64,816 comments on X.

The student protests were preceded by a similar anti-government  ('Try Jokowi') protest, which occurred at Surakarta on 14 February 2025, demanding investigation of cases involving him. However, 10 minutes later, the protesters dispersed after heavy rain. Alongside this, there have been instances of graffiti bearing the inscription  throughout parts of Java, such as Yogyakarta, Surabaya, and Malang, much of which was later removed by local authorities. Musician Iwan Fals, nonetheless, has criticised this demand and questioned what are his faults in office. Meanwhile, founder of KedaiKOPI, Hendri Satrio, has also doubted the success of this movement, stating that it would be difficult for the Prabowo's government to arrest and bring Jokowi into justice.

Central coordinator of BEM SI, Herianto, claimed that Indonesia "is being led by twin suns", and gave an example regarding ban on sale of 3 kg LPG gas cylinders by small informal retail traders, a policy that was enforced without knowledge of the president Prabowo Subianto and then subsequently repealed. He also claimed that students were disappointed after Prabowo shouted "Long live Jokowi!" during the 17th anniversary of Gerindra Party at Sentul International Convention Center. Prabowo himself has been accused by his opponents and political analysts of being Jokowi's puppet due to his closeness and the former's president influence on his policies. Prabowo denied this accusation multiple times, the most recent being during the same 17th anniversary event of Gerindra Party, which he responded to by saying "Ndasmu!" ("Your head!") with a mocking tone and facial expression. Such reaction attracted criticism from the public as being childish and confrontational towards his opposition.

Meanwhile, during protests on 17 February, Prabowo attended a closed meeting together with his ministers of Red and White Cabinet at Istana Merdeka while discussing various strategic issues such as prevention of online gambling. They were also seen having lunch together. At the same time, all eight fractions of DPR agreed to officially ratify the proposed revision of Mineral and Coal Law in 13th plenary session on 18 February. One of the proposed change to the law was to allow universities and colleges across Indonesia to receive mining permits and become involved in mining. Proponents of this change from the government argued that this will lower cost of tertiary education, while academics and students criticized the change as potentially used to silence universities from participating in activism while worsening ecological damage caused by the mining industry. This proposed change was later dropped when the law was passed on 17 February by the parliament the same day the protests erupted.

 March protests 

In March 2025, protests began to renew after Indonesian National Armed Forces Law underwent revision by the DPR. The important points of this version, include:
 Chapter 3:
 Armed Forces, previously subordinated to both the President of Indonesia and Ministry of Defense (Kemhan), is now fully subordinated to Kemhan.
 Chapter 7:
 Non-war military operations (OMSP) were increased from previous 14 into 16 tasks. The newly-added two tasks include protection efforts against cyberattacks, and protection of Indonesian citizens and national interests overseas.
 Chapter 47:
 The number of civilian positions TNI members are allowed to occupy were increased from previous 10 into 14 positions. Five of them include National Agency for Disaster Countermeasure (BNPB), National Border Management Agency (BNPP), National Counter Terrorism Agency (BNPT), Maritime Security Agency (Bakamla), and Attorney General's Office (Kejagung). The proposal to add Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries (KKP) into this list was shortly abandoned before its ratification.
 Chapter 53:
 Retirement ages vary by the rank of a soldier:
 Non-commissioned officers () and private (): 55 years
 Commissioned officers () up to colonel (): 58 years
 One-star high officer (): 60 years
 Two-star high officer (): 61 years
 Three-star high officer (): 62 years
 Four-star high officer (): 63 years, or can be extended twice by a presidential decree

On 19 March, Commission I of DPR and the government agreed to ratify the law next day, and it officially took effect on 20 March during a plenary session. This law caused strong criticism from various parties because it would potentially revive dwifungsi, leading to an online petition calling for repeal of the revision on Change.org (as of 19 March, it has been signed by more than 26 thousand people). At the same time, the perception of TNI began to deteriorate following a police raid on cockfighting gamble site incident at Way Kanan, Lampung, which led into deaths of 3 policemen after being shot by 2 soldiers and a test-drive car theft, which killed a car salesman after being shot by a Navy sailor at North Aceh, both were happened on March 17.

 April protests 
In April 2025, protests continue the second wave with #FreePalestine. The hashtag erupt over genocide committed in Israel and Prabowo's plan, who said that he was ready to evacuate a thousand Gazans in Indonesia. The plan drew the attention of the Majelis Ulama Indonesia (MUI), so that Majelis Ulama Indonesia (MUI) declared a ban on evacuating victims of the Palestinian conflict in Gaza to Indonesia because it could be interpreted as helping the interests of the Israeli occupation.

In addition, the protests erupt over authenticity of Jokowi's undergraduate diploma after one of UGM alumni, Rismon Hasiholan Sianipar, investigated the authenticity of the diploma.

 Demands 

 First phase: #IndonesiaGelap protests 
thumb|An image of the Garuda Pancasila emblem with a black background (previously with a blue background during the 2024 Indonesian local election law protests) A popular image supporting the student protest is based on the fictional Emergency Alert System (EAS) shown above but with a black background, previously blue. This has led to the bakso P.E.N.T.O.L. movement, a backronym representing six political demands (although the following emerged on 4 February, before the protest): 
 Polisi diberesin ('The police must be fixed')
 Energi buat rakyat ('Energy for the people')
 Naikkan taraf hidup rakyat ('Increase the people's well-being')
 Tunaikan tukin untuk guru, ASN dan dosen ('Pay allowances for teachers, state employees, and lecturers')
 Output MBG diperbaiki ('Fix the output of the free nutritious meal program')
 Lawan mafia tanah dan lengserkan pejabat tolol ('Fight the land mafias and topple down stupid officials')

BEM UI presented these 5 demands during the student protests:

On 17 February 2025, during the protests in Jakarta, coordinator Bagas Wisnu read out the following 13 demands to the government.

On 19 February, the original five demands presented by BEM SI have been expanded into the following seven.

Next day, the demands above were expanded again into nine.

The song "Bayar, Bayar, Bayar" from punk music duo Sukatani, used as a theme song for the protest, to criticise the Police's performance which is considered unprofessional and full of bribery, extortion, and gratification which happened inside the Police administration in Indonesia.

 Second phase: #TolakRUUTNI protests 
A second wave of demonstrations against the Draft Law on the Indonesian National Army (RUU TNI) is currently taking place across multiple regions, including Yogyakarta and Jakarta, on 19–20 March 2025. The protests involved students, lecturers, and civil society organizations, who expressed concerns that the bill could undermine democratic principles and civilian supremacy over the military. In Yogyakarta, protesters from the University of Gadjah Mada (UGM) and the Islamic University of Indonesia (UII) presented several key demands:

 Demand that the Government and DPR cancel the revision of the TNI Law, which lacks transparency, is rushed, and disregards public opinion, as it constitutes a constitutional violation.
 Demand that the Government and DPR uphold the constitution and remain committed to the Reform Agenda by preserving the principles of civilian supremacy and equality before the law, while firmly rejecting the dual function of the TNI/Polri (dwifungsi).
 Demand that the TNI/Polri, as state institutions, undergo internal reforms and enhance their professionalism to restore public trust.
 Urge all academics across Indonesia to take a firm stance against actions that undermine democracy, violate the constitution, and deviate from the reform agenda.
 Encourage and support civil society efforts to safeguard the Reform Agenda by actively monitoring and holding the Government and Parliament accountable.
On 19 March 2025, students from Trisakti University staged a demonstration at Gerbang Pancasila, within the Parliament Complex in Jakarta, opposing the proposed revision of the Indonesian National Army Law (UU TNI). They presented four main demands, expressing concerns that the revisions could weaken civilian supremacy and potentially reintroduce the military's dual function (dwifungsi TNI) in politics and governance. The demands were presented to Minister of Law, Supratman Andi Agtas. The key demands of the protest included:

 Reject the entire draft revision of the TNI Law which is considered to weaken civilian supremacy and open up opportunities for the return of the dual function of the TNI. 
 Urging the removal and termination of active TNI-Polri officers from civilian positions to prevent abuse of power and corrupt practices in the military.
 Achieve civilian supremacy and stop the neglect of the reform agenda to ensure that the military remains in the corridor of its main task as the guardian of national defence. 
 Reject all forms of militarisation in civilian government and demand the government's commitment to safeguard democratic values and human rights.
On 7 April 2025, Suara Papua finalise demands of protesters in Indonesia. These are:

 Close Freeport, BP LNG Tangguh and restore the people's sovereign rights.
 Stop military operations and withdraw organic and non-organic military from all of Papua.
 Stop the National Strategic Project (PSN) in Merauke, Fak-fak, and Sorong
 Close down all illegal companies throughout West Papua.
 Revoke TNI Law number 34 of 2025, reject the Police Bill, reject the Broadcasting Bill.
 Give the right to self-determination as a democratic solution for the Papuan people.
 Reject the Free Nutritious Meal Programme (MBG).
 Stop the criminalisation and killing of Papuans.
 Allow foreign journalists to cover Indonesia, especially the Land of Papua.
 Thoroughly investigate cases of human rights violations in the Land of Papua.
 Stop the Sorong Special Economic Zone (SEZ) development project.
 Stop the silencing of democratic space and stop the criminalisation of Papuan pro-independence activists.
 Pass the Indigenous Peoples Bill.
 Stop mining exploration in Raja Ampat

 Protests 

 Sumatra 
All dates are in Western Indonesia Time (WIB; UTC+07:00).
In Banda Aceh, students from Syiah Kuala University (USK) organised a protest in front of the Aceh Regional House of Representatives (DPRA). They additionally demanded transparency of the use of a special autonomy fund. The head of NasDem Party's fraction and member of the DPRA third commission, Nurchalis, promised that the students' demands would be discussed at the legislature and carried to the national level. The protesters left significant rubbish, ranging from used drinking bottles to banners. Since the protesters ignored the requests by journalists to clean the rubbish, it was cleaned by the police.
thumb|Student protestors from the State Islamic University of North Sumatra in front of the North Sumatra DPRD building in Medan
In Medan, students from State Islamic University of North Sumatra protested front of the building of North Sumatra Regional House of Representatives (DPRD) on 20 February. They carried several banners, and the building was guarded by dozens of personnels. After hours, representatives from DPRD met them and guaranteed that their demands will be brought to North Sumatra DPRD and national DPR. Protests resumed next day, not long after, a representative of Commission C of the legislature, Palacheta Subies Subianto met them. Several posters were attached to the fences of North Sumatra DPRD, and used tires were burned during the event. On 26 March, students from North Sumatra Students' Union Alliance began to organise a sit-in front of North Sumatra DPRD building at 03:00 p.m., while some others were inside the building's hall after successfully jumping over its fence. The protests heated up after they burned used tires and clashed with policemen. Next day, Accumulation of People's and Labour's Anger (AKBAR) held a protest in the same building, but later clashed with the police. According to the Commission for Missing Persons and Victims of Violence (KontraS), dozens of people were injured during the event.

In Pematangsiantar, on 27 March, students from the University of Simalungun clashed with policemen at Pematangsiantar DPRD, after attempting to forcefully enter the building. Three protesters were arrested by the police, meanwhile, one of the students, Afriadi Lesmana, was beaten up by a DPRD member and municipal policemen.

In Padang, students from Andalas University (UNAND) and Padang State Polytechnics (PNP) protested front of the entrance gate into UNAND. Later, hundreds of students under the All-West Sumatra Alliance of Students' Unions protested in front of the building of the West Sumatra DPRD on 18 February 2025 at 3 p.m., and also held several banners.

In Bukittinggi, a number of community elements and the Bukittinggi student alliances, including the Indonesian Muslim Student Union (SEMMI) of Bukittinggi City, held a demonstration at the Bukittinggi DPRD building on Thursday, 20 March 2025.

In Pekanbaru, students from the Islamic University of Riau protested front of the Riau DPRD building on 26 February. They additionally demanded for the reimbursement of scholarships for 6,000 students. The protesters dispersed after submitting their demands to the parliament members.

In Tanjung Pinang, 62 students protested front of the Riau Islands DPRD building. They were guarded by 150 joint personnels from regional and municipal police.

In Palembang, on 20 February, hundreds of students, mainly from Raden Fatah State Islamic University (UIN Raden Fatah), walked from Campus A at 10 a.m. and arrived in front of the building of South Sumatra DPRD at 10:30 a.m. They attempted to bring used tires top of a command car, but they were obstructed by forces. After negotiations, they were allowed to do so. However, after failing to meet the speaker of South Sumatra DPRD, Andi Dinialdie, protesters brought down the tires and burned them in front of the building. It was previously projected that it would be attended by 1,000 people. The protesters also gave an ultimatum of 3 × 24 hours to the government to take position regarding the budget cuts. Then, deputy speaker Ilyas Panji and member of parliament M Nasir met the protesters and agreed to reject budget cuts and to fulfill their demands.

In Pangkal Pinang, students from University of Bangka Belitung together with Bangka Belitung Students' Union Alliance, protested front of the building of Bangka Belitung DPRD. They arrived at 3:20 p.m.

In Bandar Lampung, hundreds of students from various local universities protested in front of the Lampung provincial government complex. They carried an oratory car as well as several banners, one of them has the inscription  (Education is at stake, Indonesia is anxious, education emergency, alert alert!).

In Bengkulu, students mainly from Muhammadiyah Bengkulu University gathered in Simpang Lima, Ratu Sambang District. They stated that they also held protest in Padang Kuas, Seluma Regency while stating that the student organizations there are consolidating for a bigger protest that will be held later.

 Java 
All dates are in Western Indonesia Time (WIB; UTC+07:00).

 Jakarta 
thumb|Students from the University of Indonesia participating in the protest
In Jakarta, the protests started on 17 February at Horse Statue, Central Jakarta, but then spread into South Medan Merdeka and West Medan Merdeka Roads, causing traffic jams at Bundaran HI. Thousands of protesters shouted  ('long live students') and carried various banners and posters that represent their demands, such as  ('a climate crisis is a democratic crisis') and  ('not yet full, stupid yes').

Previously, student union of the University of Indonesia (BEM UI) instructed its members to wear black clothing and yellow alma maters, which is characteristic of the university. A total of 1,623 joint personnels were deployed for security, and traffic at West Medan Merdeka Road towards Merdeka Palace was closed, except for the Transjakarta Bus.

thumb|Students from  (PTMA) standing in front of a police blockade

They later burned used tires and several posters, including a portrait of cabinet secretary Teddy Indra Wijaya, and several of them took down their almamaters under the instruction of an orator. At 6 p.m., the police appealed to the protesters to disperse, but they remained and threw objects such as water bottles, rubbish, and wooden slats on policemen. One policeman was injured during the event. Public relations coordinator for , Bagas Wisnu, read out 13 demands to the government, ranging from educational to political issues (see above). They finally dispersed on 8 p.m. and janitors began to clean rubbish at the site. Disabled influencer Badru also attended the protests and prayed for the protesters.

The plans for a demonstration next day were cancelled by BEM SI, in preparation for peak demonstrations on 20 February at Istana Negara, will be hold simultaneously with the inauguration of 481 regional heads. A day later, BEM SI organised again a protest at Arjuna Wiwaha Horse Statue, and guarded by 775 joint personnels, although its coordinator Herianto said that they would organise a field technical this date in order to discuss its preparation. However, the head of public relations at Greater Jakarta Metropolitan Regional Police, Ade Ary Syam, has appealed to the public to maintain order during the inauguration of regional heads by not organising protests at Istana Negara this time. The students' union of Udayana University also decided not to participate in this protest. The protests would be held at the location at 2:00 p.m. (protesters would gather at 1:00 p.m.), and Herianto projected that it would be attended by 3,000 students.

Half section of the West Medan Merdeka Road has been closed starting from 11:34 a.m., and the police used forklifts to install concrete blockades. The Central Jakarta police has deployed 588 joint personnels from Horse Statue towards front of Istana Negara, and barbed wires were installed at the location. This time, protesters from 4 students' unions arrived at 2:37 p.m. at Horse Statue, seen wearing their almamaters. They also carried various banners and pamphlets, with inscriptions such as  and  ('One President Full of Incidents'). They started with giving speeches front of the blockades. They were also seen raising up fists on their left arms. Nada, a 44-year-old woman, distributed free foods and drinks for protesters at the location.

The protesters began to burn used tires near the concrete blockades at 2:45 p.m. Then, they tore down the blockades using ropes on the instruction by the orator, while the local police requested them to not do so. After their efforts were successful, they sang national anthem "Indonesia Raya" and "Indonesia Pusaka". During the event, the protesters accused a man for pickpocketing, and later submitted him to nearby police post.
thumb|Protesters in front of Merdeka Palace during the , raising the theme "Dark Indonesia" in support for the student demonstration, 20 February 2025
Raden Roro Neno gave a speech to protesters, encouraging them not to be trampled by the oligarchy. She also gave support for them and prayed for their success and health. A female student read poem "Apa Guna" by Widji Thukul. One foreign national was arrested by plainclothes (suspected to be intelligence officers) while taking images during the protests. He later admitted that he was not part of any foreign media outlet.

The protesters finally dispersed on 6:25 p.m. after Minister of the State Secretariat Prasetyo Hadi, together with his deputy Juri Ardiantoro met them and agreed to their demands. Prasetyo also requested the protesters to learn their demands within 48 hours before discussing it with student representatives. He was seen inviting the protesters to sing "Darah Juang" together, and hugged the protesters. Later, Prasetyo claimed that his struggles in the government, were in line with the students' demands.
thumb|Protesters showcasing pro-intelligentsia flyers
On 21 February, hundreds of civilian elements, including students without their almamaters, gathered at Ismail Marzuki Park before protesting at Horse Statue. They carried various banners and posters, one of them featured Prabowo's old post on Twitter from 2016. The protesters also played the song "Bayar Bayar Bayar" by Sukatani and "The Internationale" translated into Indonesian by Ki Hajar Dewantara. Then, they threw away water bottles and firecrackers to policemen, and damaged barbed wires. Badru returned to the protests and read out all five principles of Pancasila for the protesters. One protester was seen destroying a CCTV at 5:55 p.m. There were incidents of throwing Molotov cocktails, firecrackers, and fireworks, but also the burning of water barriers on the Transjakarta busway, followed by  ('alert') shouts. They also burned rubbish at the location, and rampaged an intruder, allegedly an intelligence officer, in the middle of the protests. The crowds finally dispersed at 8:30 p.m. and janitors began to clean rubbish and extinguish fires.
thumb|Non-alma mater youth protesters gathering at Bundaran Patung Kuda, 21 February 2025
Around 2,460 joint personnels from regional police, military, and the regional government, were deployed for security during the protests. Haus distributed  of free drinks for protesters through 15 stands. The fan club of South Korean boy band NCT, NCTzen, deployed an ambulance under the 'NCTzen Humanity x Bareng Warga' banner and distributed free foods for the protesters. It was projected that 2,500 people would attend the protests.

thumb|Members of the KontraS activist group being escorted after occupying the Fairmont Hotel in Senayan, Jakarta, 15 March 2025.

On 15 March, the Civil Society Coalition led by Andrie Yunus stormed a representatives meeting held at the Fairmont Hotel in Senayan minutes before iftar. During the storming, representatives consist of the First Commission of the House of Representatives are discussing to pass the revision of the Armed Forces law behind closed door for 2 days. The protesters were later dispersed by the security guards.

On 19 March, the student mass protest would resume in Jakarta as group of students from Trisakti University planned to hold a rally in front of the parliament building gate for 2 days. At the middle of the protest, law minister Supratman Andi Agtas along with 13th commission member Vita Ervina were blocked from entering the parliament building. Protesters initially tried to eject Agtas from the car despite being heavily guarded but after being pressured, Agtas voluntarily exited his car to meet the protesters. The protesters also began to set up tents front of the gate into DPR. 

On 20 March 2025, Indonesian Women's Alliance joined the protest demanding the DPR to withdraw the revision of Armed Forces Law. During the event, 5,021 joint personnels from police, military, and local government were deployed with reported minor clashes between law enforcers, camping protesters, and few journalists. Speaker of the DPR, Puan Maharani, answered to the protests and stated that the legislature is ready to give explanation regarding ambiguities on the law. Meanwhile, a black flag charged with the national emblem of Indonesia and text  in the bottom, was flown half-mast at front of Gerbang Pancasila.

During the protest, 4 students from University of Indonesia and one from Muhammadiyah Prof.Dr.Hamka University were reportedly injured during the protest and were rushed to hospital after the police opened fire against the protesters. One motorcycle taxi driver was beaten by police after being mistaken as protester. Some segments of the fences front of the DPR were also broken down, after the crowd attempted to enter the building. Due to the situation on the street, ambulances were unable to drive to the area due to the mentioned circumstances, as a result some injured protesters were transported to nearby Pelni hospital using motorcycle. One protester was reportedly missing after the protest and 5 people were arrested. At least 4 police officers suffered injuries after being hit by firecrackers thrown by protesters.
left|thumb|Indonesian protesters wearing gear and umbrellas reminiscent of the 2020 Hong Kong and Thai Protests. The scene depicts demonstrators being provoked and dispersed with tear gas, readying umbrellas to counter police actions, 27 March
On 27 March, 1,824 joint personnel from the police, military, and local government were deployed in preparation for the protests at DPR building. In order to avoid violent outbreak and future doxxing from happening, protesters begin to wear protective gears since 27 March inspired from Hong Kong Umbrella Movement and 2019 Hong Kong protest that happened prior and the move was later followed nationwide. They carried various banners and stickers, such as  ('The ideology of this country is Pancasila, not Sapta Marga'). 

The protesters began to blockade the toll road located near the Parliamentary Complex, lit fireworks, and burned used tires front of the gate. Some of them attempted to climb its fences after being upset that no representative of the DPR could met the protesters. They also burned down a police motorcycle and overran its driver, who at the moment wore civilian clothing. As a response, the police attempted to forcefully disperse protesters using water cannon at 06:20 p.m., and some of the crowd were pushed out into Senayan. They finally dispersed at 06:31 p.m., and janitors began to clean rubbish throughout Gatot Subroto Road.

On 28 March 2025, Indonesian Mothers' Voice held a protest at the pavement of Sarinah Building.

A smaller protest resumed on 7 April 2025 after Lebaran. Numerous protesters set up camping tents in front of the parliament building.  Themed  ('Picnic to Resist'), they were forced to move into pavement next to Gelora Road on 8 April, and their tents were forcibly dismantled by 30 officers from Municipal Police next day. The protesters have requested for attention by governor Pramono Anung.

Piknik Melawan was held again on 14 April. The tent was to be erected right in front of the Pancasila Gate of the House of Representatives, however, the participants were forced to move to the pavement opposite. On that night, six picnic participants, two women and four men, were put into a police car. The arrests were said to have been made without interrogation and without legal representation. Half an hour or so later, those arrested were released. They regrouped and set up their tents again.

On 15 April, Bivitri Susanti, constitutional law expert, gave a public lecture at Piknik Melawan. The discussion between Bivitri and dozens of camp participants began at around 03:55 p.m.

 Malang 
thumb|Theatrical action of crouching for cover in front of the Malang City Hall.
In Malang, protests were held on 18 February at the Monument Roundabout, precisely in front of the building of Malang DPRD. Thousands of people came at 12 p.m. and carried various banners and posters featuring demands, with inscriptions such as  'No to Efficiency for the Oligarchy, Yes to Efficiency for the People', and  'Justice Is Killed in 100 Days'. Presidential portraits of Prabowo and Gibran were defaced with the text  on their eyes and a cross on their mouths. An hour later, the portraits, alongside used tires, were burned in front of the entrance gate towards DPRD. After successfully meeting the speaker of DPRD, Amithya Ratnanggani Siraduhita, as well as several fraction leaders, the protesters finally dispersed at 4 p.m. during heavy rains.thumb|Members of the Assembly from Malang City DPRD in dialogue with demonstratorsOn 23 March, protesters with black clothing returned to the Malang DPRD building at 04:00 p.m.. They carried banners, vandalised the fences, and wrote demands to repeal the revised Armed Forces Law and messages critical of the government on asphalt road. They also played a theatrical featuring the reconstruction of an accident. By 06:00 p.m., the protests became increasingly violent and riots became prominent, with throwing of Molotov cocktails and burning of TNI uniforms. Seven police and TNI personnel were injured in the protests. Meanwhile, a medical team were beaten down and verbally abused by the personnels, and their medical supplies and gadgets were seized. Around 8–10 people were missing, while dozen others were injured, with 6–7 of them were rushed to local hospitals. Next day following the riots, Malang regional police and Indonesian National Student Movement branch in East Java went involved in a community service to clean up the building.

 Surabaya 
thumb|Masses protest in the framework of the rejection of the TNI Law in front of Grahadi Negara Surabaya on March 24, 2025
In Surabaya, the protests occurred before the building of the East Java Regional House of Representatives. The student protesters came from various local universities and numbered up to thousands. They burned a bier with inscription  after their attempts to meet the speaker of DPRD failed. Then, they attempted to cross the wire fence, and the police fired a water cannon at them. The protesters escaped, and several threw objects, such as water bottles, at policemen. Around 620 personnels were deployed for security during the protests. Head of the students' union of the Airlangga University, Aulia Thoriq Akbar, stated that five students have been reportedly arrested by the police. Two of them, each came from UNESA and UINSA (Sunan Ampel State Islamic University Surabaya), while head of operations Wibowo denied it. Novan Ziyan Ramadhan from the State University of Surabaya (UNESA) was injured after being stepped on and beaten up by policemen, as a result, the involved member has been reportedly questioned by the professional and security sector, although he denied it. 

Protests resumed in Surabaya on 21 February, and it was attended by both students and civilians. Two members of East Java DPRD from Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle (PDI-P), Fuad Bernardi and Yordan Batara Goa, were pettled with water bottles, after they met the protesters while in recess. They later burned used tires, reading a poem titled 'Taek', and feature a theatrical at the site.
thumb|Protestors congregate for a speech in Surabaya, 24 March 2025|left
On 24 March 2025, hundreds of students with black clothing, arrived at , the official residence of the governor of East Java at 02:00 p.m.. They carried various posters critical of the government and burned used tires on the road. The protest turned increasingly violent when the protesters started to throw away stones, firecrackers, plastic bottles, and other objects to the guards. One of them threw away a Molotov cocktail to the gate toward Grahadi. Around 1,100 personnel from Surabaya regional police were deployed during the event, and they forcefully dispersed the protesters at 06:00 p.m. with an armored car. Following the event, 25 people were arrested by the police (2 of them were students), and 6 policemen suffered injuries. The former chairman of the Surabaya branch of Indonesian National Student Movement (GMNI), Rizky Syahputra is among the injured victims, he suffered fracture on his left arm and laceration on the left leg. The protest also caused serious damage on nearby Apsari Garden, leaving thousands of plants destroyed and three lamps being lost.

On 10 April, Surabaya regional police held a traffic engineering in preparation for a protest at Grahadi, planned to be held at 02:00 p.m. until 05:00 p.m.. At the same time, dozens of participants wearing black clothing from Civil Society Coalition, began to hold a protest at Apsari Garden during rains at 02:45 p.m..

 Yogyakarta 
thumb|Graffiti pleading for the Sultan of Yogyakarta to help the people amidst the TNI Law protests and the 1312, 20 March 2025.
In Yogyakarta, the Jogja Is Calling Alliance has called students and civilians to participate in the protests. Themed  ('Together with the People'), the long march started at Abu Bakar Ali parking lot (scheduled initially at 10:00 a.m.), then moved down Malioboro Street. Protesters were dressed in black to align with the viral hashtag. The action, led by students and members of the public, featured posters criticizing the economic, educational, social, and political policies of the Prabowo-Gibran administration. Slogans included: "Free Food, Crisis Education," "RIP = Republic of Indonesia Patriarchy," "Let's Fight Against the Infidels," "Don't Let the Military Run Your Kitchen!" and "Reject Oligarchy, Style ABRI Dual Function." The movement, branded Jogja Memanggil, further demanded the resignation of President Prabowo and Vice President Gibran and the dissolution of the Red and White Cabinet, citing incompetence and a perceived lack of alignment with public interests. Protesters also condemned Prabowo's response during Gerindra's anniversary event on 15 February 2025, where he reportedly said "Ndasmu!" (a Javanese insult) to critics. Demonstrators viewed this remark as unacceptable for a head of state. Just over 100 days into the new administration, the group claims the government has already caused significant harm, leading them to call for its immediate resignation and structural overhaul. The protestors would arrive at the Special Region of Yogyakarta DPRD building at 12:15 p.m. Not long after, they burned used tires, threw red liquid on the building's gate and stuck a poster with the inscription  ('The Government Is Stupid'). 

At 12:44 p.m, protesters continued the long march towards Gedung Agung and Point Zero of Yogyakarta. They additionally demanded for the resignation of president Prabowo and his vice Gibran. It was projected that 1,000 people would participate in the protests. At the same time, several banners critical of the government were installed at the Faculty of Social and Political Sciences building at Gadjah Mada University (UGM). After the demonstration was over, students worked together to clean up the rubbish along Malioboro. The police who had previously escorted the crowd also helped clean up the area. In a short time, the location was clean again, allowing tourists to continue their activities. 'We want to show that this action is also about responsibility,' said Hermawan, one of the demonstrators. The Yogyakarta Police appreciated the peaceful demonstration through its official account, expressing gratitude to the students for maintaining order during the demonstration. 

On 25 February, students under Muslim Students' Association (HMI) organised a long march at Malioboro Street towards Special Region of Yogyakarta DPRD and then the Point Zero of Yogyakarta. They also burned street cones.thumb|Statue of Raden Soedirman at the Yogyakarta DPRD. The graffiti reads: 

"Keep fighting, there are too many victims."Amidst concern on an upcoming draft law, the impetus for the second wave of the 2025 Indonesian protests started in Yogyakarta when the Jogja Memanggil Alliance held the 'Dark Indonesia' Volume 2 demonstration on 11 March 2025, walking from Abu Bakar Ali Parking Lot to Yogyakarta's Zero Point in the pouring rain. Dozens of students and activists demanded President Prabowo Subianto and Vice President Gibran Rakabuming Raka resign, while carrying posters criticising the government. The demonstration themed 'Ruwat Ruweting Penguasa Durno' was based on the concept of ruwatan in Javanese culture, which means cleansing from harm. Alliance spokesperson Hidayah said the ruwatan tradition is relevant to the current situation, where people need to be free from a corrupt regime. In addition to the theatrical action, the demonstrators highlighted BPI Danantara, the government's strategic investment agency, which is chaired by a number of Prabowo-Gibran cabinet officials such as Rosan Roeslani, Erick Thohir, and Sri Mulyani. They argued that these appointments violated the Law on State Ministries. Other figures such as Jokowi, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, and former British PM Tony Blair were also criticised for their involvement in Danantara's Advisory Board and Supervisory Board. The crowd also criticised economic policies, including the planned 12% VAT hike, the scarcity of BBM, budget cuts outside of defence, as well as weak oversight that opened up loopholes for corruption. The Indonesia Corruption Watch (ICW) recorded 119 cases of BUMN corruption in 2016–2021 with state losses of IDR 40 trillion. Demonstrators criticised Prabowo for being anti-criticism, especially after his 'ndasmu' statement that offended the people regarding the Free Nutritious Meal programme.

On 18 March, students and faculty of Gadjah Mada University organised a strike to protest against the revision of Armed Forces law which will be passed on 20 March by the House of Representatives.

Another demonstration took place on 20 March 2025, this time the demonstration took place at the DPRD of Yogyakarta Special Region. This demonstration was joined by the Jogja Memanggil alliance. In addition to being followed by the Jogja Memanggil Alliance, a number of elements ranging from students at various campuses in Yogyakarta to activists were also seen accompanying, including the Cik Ditiro Forum. Police were deployed, including tactical vehicles, to secure the action. The spokesperson for the action, Bung Koes, argued that the TNI Bill had the potential to threaten democracy by authorising soldiers to hold civilian positions. Marsinah, from the Jogja Memanggil Alliance, said the bill risked reviving authoritarianism in the style of the New Order. The masses also criticised the ratification process, which was considered to be closed and procedurally flawed.

Though initially peaceful, the action turned tense at around 3.45 pm, when the crowd began to graffiti the walls of the DIY DPRD with graffiti such as 'Reject the TNI Law', 'Adili Prabowo' and anti-police calls such as 'ACAB' and '1312'. The crowd also burned garbage, set off firecrackers, lit bonfires, and threw things down the hall. Until the evening, the crowd remained and planned to stay overnight in the courtyard of the DPRD DIY. They set up tents, built bonfires, broke their fast, played games, and continued to hold a free pulpit while giving speeches. The action was interspersed with poetry reading and singing songs to encourage the protesters. The masses also called for satay, , and beverage vendors into the DIY DPRD environment for a meal break. Despite an ultimatum from the police, the Yogyakartan DPRD office were vandalised by thrown litters and graffiti and protesters threatened to stay in front of the office indefinitely.
thumb|Occupation of the Yogyakarta DPRD building during the demonstration against the TNI Law, 20 March 2025
The police asked the demonstrators in the yard of the DIY DPRD to disperse using loudspeakers. The demonstrators asked for permission to stay until morning, but the police only gave them one hour. Yogyakarta Police Chief Senior Commissioner Aditya Surya Dharma stated, "Please discuss it, we'll give you one hour." Meanwhile, representatives of the masses hoped that the demonstration could last all night with the concept of "camping together" to voice their opinions. However, the police stuck to their initial decision, limiting the time of the demonstration to 00.00 WIB. At around 00.40 WIB, the police deployed two Mobile Brigade (Brimob) tactical vehicles and dozens of riot police. Chaos ensued, with bottles and firecrackers being thrown at the police. Water cannons were used to push back the demonstrators. Meanwhile, outside the DIY DPRD complex, from the south side there was another group of people trying to approach the demonstrators rejecting the TNI Law. This unidentified group in civilian clothes uttered various insults at the demonstrators rejecting the TNI Law who they considered to be the cause of the riot. A number of police personnel were seen blocking the group of residents so that they would not clash with the protesters who remained in front of the DPRD building. The police prevented a clash between the two groups. The Secretary of the DIY DPRD, Yudi Ismono, said he could not yet detail the total losses due to vandalism. The DIY DPRD building, which is a cultural heritage site, experienced extensive spray-painted graffiti, as well as an incident of burning garbage. Police remained on site to prevent further damage.

On 29 March, Indonesian Mothers' Voice held a protest at Titik Nol Kilometer Yogyakarta on Malioboro Street

On 15 April, hundreds of people who are members of the Ulama and Activist Defence Team (TPUA) came to the Faculty of Forestry, Universitas Gadjah Mada (UGM), Sleman, Yogyakarta to ask for clarification on the alleged fake diploma of the 7th President of Indonesia, Joko Widodo. They gathered in front of Room 109 of the Faculty of Forestry UGM around 07:45 a.m, including mothers. Not long after, four representatives of the protesters entered Room 109 of the Faculty of Forestry UGM to attend an audience with the rector regarding Jokowi's diploma. Meanwhile, Amien Rais was also among the crowd. He said that UGM's explanation of Jokowi's previous diploma did not prove enough and instead seemed to be spinning.

 Surakarta 
In Surakarta, students started walking backward from Makutho Monument at 2:00 p.m., and arrived front of the Surakarta DPRD building at Adi Sucipto Road at 3:40 p.m., on 19 February. The protesters also carried various anti-government banners and burned used tires. Their action was guarded by hundreds of joint personnel from the military, police, and the Department of Transportation. Coordinator Syaiful interpreted that a backward walk represents that "the nation is experiencing a setback". They threatened if their 6 demands were not realised in 3 days, they would return with a larger number of protesters.

On 19 March, hundreds of Sebelas Maret University (UNS) students held a protest rally at the Surakarta City Council. The students unfurled white banners with various writings, such as ‘Return TNI to Barracks’, as well as the hashtags #hapuskanRUUTNI, #TolakRUUTNI, #Pukulmundur, and #Supremasisipil. The President of BEM UNS 2025 said that his side hoped that DPRD Surakarta could convey their aspirations to the central government not to pass the TNI Law. He said that the TNI Law could bring back New Order Volume 2.

On 20 March, students and the public participated in the demonstration against the ratification of the TNI Law wearing all black clothes. The demonstration carried the theme Solo Raya Menggugat Indonesia Gelap Jilid 2 and made a long march from Al Muhlihun Mosque Surakarta to the Surakarta DPRD Building, which is about 300 metres away. The action coordinator said the demonstration at the Surakarta DPRD building was carried out as a form of disappointment over the passing of the revised TNI Law by the House of Representatives on Thursday (20/03).

On 16 April, protesters from the Ulama and Activist Defence Team (TPUA) who wanted to see the authenticity of the diploma of the 7th President, Joko Widodo, came to his residence. The atmosphere was heated around Jokowi's residence when the TPUA camp met with dozens of supporters of the 7th President of the Republic of Indonesia who had been waiting since morning and then subsided after security officers, both the police on guard and the Paspampres, allowed representatives to met with Jokowi. There were at least four representatives who met Jokowi inside his residence, one of whom was TPUA Deputy, Chair Rizal Fadillah. He confirmed this when met by reporters after the meeting with Jokowi. He said the purpose of their visit to Jokowi's residence was not only to stay in touch in the atmosphere of Eid al-Fitr like other residents, but also to connect with Jokowi's diploma. The meeting lasted about 30 minutes. However, their hopes of being shown Jokowi's diploma directly had to be dashed. Because during the meeting Jokowi did not show his diploma to them. 

Prior to the meeting with Ulama and Activist Defence Team TPUA, Joko Widodo invited dozens of media crews including CNN Indonesia to enter his residence. However, Jokowi did not allow media crews to take pictures during the meeting and was asked to collect mobile phones and cameras. He showed his diplomas from elementary to high school, and also his undergraduate degree at UGM. The UGM diploma shown by Jokowi is very similar to the image circulating on social media. However, Jokowi was reluctant to confirm the similarity of the circulating diploma photo with his own.

 Other protests in Java 
In Serang, students organised a sit-in at the Ciceri intersection on 20 March 2025.

In Bogor, students illegally held a protest on 27 March. They blocked a road; attacked policemen with stones, firecrackers and Molotov cocktails; and burned water barriers. As a result, several stalls and Kujang Monument were damaged, and 13 protesters were arrested by the police. Their actions were also condemned as 'anarchist'.

In Bekasi, on 25 March, a protest was held at front of the Bekasi DPRD building. However, it caused damages on the building and 2 police cars were vandalised. As a result, 8 protesters were arrested by the police (2 of them were already graduated and the rest were students).

In Karawang, a protest that was held on 25 March ended up with clashes between protesters and authorities along with pro-government paramilitary groups. The regional DPRD building was damaged during the protest. During the protest it was widely reported that police officers were caught hijacking the ambulance carrying the wounded protesters to de re-routed to the police station instead of hospital, arresting 5 wounded protesters and 2 paramedics. According to Cakra Legal Aid Institute, 15 people were missing during the event (and possibly also arrested by the police).

In Sukabumi, on 20 March, students and civilians began to protest front of Sukabumi DPRD building at 03:00 p.m.. They managed to penetrate through installed barbed wires, but also burning used tires and involving in clashes with policemen. The protest was also attended by Yana Fajar, an academician from the Muhammadiyah University of Sukabumi. During the event, a journalist from Metro TV, Apit Haeruman, was intimidated and strangled by several student protesters. As a result, one protester suffered nasal fracture, and the investigation of assaults during Sukabumi protest is currently underway.

In Bandung, on 17 February, the students protested front of the building of West Java DPRD. One participant, Ainul Mardhyah, from National Students' Front, expressed that her affirmation scholarship was being cut 10%. A daughter of migrant workers in Malaysia, she also concerned about the protection of Indonesian migrant workers. Protests later resumed on 21 February, with participants shouting  'revolution' and burning used tires. They also attempted to penetrate barbed wires. As of 24 March 25 people are confirmed to be wounded after clashes with police forces and pro-government paramilitary group. The building of Hana Bank office was also burned down by the crowd, and an investigation by the local police is currently underway. Faqih Rohman Syafei, a journalist from , was beaten down by the protesting crowd after being accused as an undercover agent of State Intelligence Agency. The protest was resumed at Gedung Merdeka by Papua Students' Alliance on 7 April 2025.

In Tasikmalaya, on 19 February, more than 100 student protesters attempted to enter the building of Tasikmalaya DPRD to voice their aspirations. However, security forces carried out the entrance gate. During heavy rains, jostlings occurred until the gate collapsed, then, a water cannon started to fire on protesters. They began to throw away various hard objects into police cars, causing the glass on the security post to shatter. Regional police chief Moh. Faruk Rozi invited them into dialogue, and finally agreed to enter the building. Three policemen and one student were injured during the event.

In Indramayu, students under the alliance of students' unions of Indramayu protested at the building of Indramayu DPRD. They attempted to smash the entrance doors of the building, causing jostlings with policemen. They also burned used tires and threw away objects to officers, due to being annoyed that the speaker of Indramayu DPRD could not meet them. Few moments later, they were able to meet the speaker and representatives of DPRD members.

In Cirebon, protests occurred front of the building of Cirebon DPRD. They were later able to enter the building, after penetrating barbed wires and police guards. Then, they challenged the deputy speaker of Cirebon DPRD, Fitrah Malik, and head of Commission I, Agung Supirno, to debate with the protesters. The protesters threatened them to resign from their positions, if unable to answer their questions. On 24 March, dozens of students under Cirebon Is Suing Alliance arrived to protest at the same building at 02:00 p.m., postponed from the original schedule at 09:00 a.m.. The protesters clashed with policemen, before later being allowed for dialogues with several parliament members. However, the protests intensified when they attempted to lower the national flag on the hall. It was followed by firecracker and Molotov cocktail attacks, and vandalism.

In Brebes, on 28 March, students held a protest at front of the Brebes DPRD building. They were later invited by deputy speaker Iqbal Tanjung for a discussion.

In Purwokerto, students under Community Union in Motion (Semarak) organised a long march from Prof. KH. Saifuddin Zuhri State Islamic University towards the Banyumas Regent Office. They carried several banners, among them have inscriptions such as  ('A Disappointment of the Republic of Indonesia, One President Full of Incidents') and  ('Continue to Create Policies for the Oligarchy, Your Head!'). They also repeatedly chanted "Ganyang Fufufafa" ('Crush Fufufafa'). Protests resumed on 21 March, with students carrying a banner with inscription  'Against Prabowo's Fascist Regime', and spread cow dung on soldiers guarding Military District Commando 0701.

In Semarang, students under the Alliance of Students' Unions of Greater Semarang organised a protest front of the Semarang City Hall on 18 February. Thousands of students arrived at 2:30 p.m., and organised a long march from Pemuda Road into front of the building of Central Java DPRD. They also carried banners critical of the government, and chanted "Ganyang Fufufafa". After attempts to meet the DPRD members failed, and a representative came instead, the protesters mocked to enter again into the building, and threw away cow dung on the gate as a sense of their annoyance. Field coordinator, Evan Surya from Diponegoro University, rated the initial performance of Prabowo's government −100 from 100. Previously, it was planned at 9:00 a.m. and projected to be attended by 1,600 people. As another nationwide protest against the Armed Forces law being held across the country on 20 March, police threw tear gas and arrested 5 people, 3 of them students, in front of the governor office and DPRD building in Semarang. One student from the Soegijapranata Catholic University, was beaten down and arrested by the police, but was later released at 09:00 p.m and rushed to the Kariadi Hospital.

In Kudus, around 70 students under Muslim Students' Association (HMI), from Kudus, Rembang and Jepara, organised a protest front of the building of Kudus DPRD. They also carried banners and other attributes.

In Rembang, Indonesian National Student Movement (GMNI) and Muslim Students' Association (HMI) held a protest in front of Rembang DPRD, 8 April 2025. They initially attempted to infiltrate the building after no member could meet them, but their actions were halted after being found by DPRD secretariat. Meanwhile, parents of Hamim Muarif, the chairman of GMNI Rembang branch, were reportedly intimidated by TNI members. This prompted the participants to move the protest to Military District Commando 0720/Rembang.

In Tuban, on 26 March, students from Cipayung Plus alliance protested front of the Tuban DPRD building. They also burned used tires, and carried a pocong featuring the face of Indonesian president, later to be given to several figures of the legislature, including its speaker.

In Bojonegoro, hundreds of black-clothed protesters from Veteran Is Calling Alliance held a protest front of the Bojonegoro DPRD building. They additionally gave speech and vandalised the building. The protesters attempted to enter Bojonegoro DPRD at 05:00 p.m., leading into clashes with guarding policemen. The police finally dispersed the crowd with a water cannon. As a result, dozens of protesters were injured due to being trampled, meanwhile, 4 others were arrested.

In Kediri, on 17 February, around 60 students from Brawijaya University organised a sit-in front of the Kediri DPRD building. They arrived using motorcycles at 2:15 p.m. and carried several banners and posters rejecting the streamlining policy under the Presidential Instruction Number 1 of 2025. After an hour, they met Deputy Speaker Sudjono Teguh Widjaja to discuss with the protesters. On 27 March 2025, protesters from Sekartaji Alliance, consisting of various student and labour elements, held a protest at Kediri DPRD, wearing black clothing and white ribbon on their left hands. By evening, the protest went chaotic for unclear reasons, and 2 protesters were injured. Also, 26 protesters were arrested by the police, but later released after receiving assistance by Al-Amin Legal Aid Institute. The violence during the protest triggered condemnation by KontraS.

In Blitar Regency, on 24 March, students clashed with policemen at the Blitar DPRD building, after failed to meet the parliament members.

In Jombang, on 29 March, 200 students held a long march at Jombang branch of Indonesian Journalists Association, and arrived at 04:00 p.m. during rains to hold a protest front of Jombang DPRD. The protest was marked by burning of used tires and black clothing, but they also carried various banners. During the protesters were met with two parliament members. Coordinator Muhammad Hidayatulluh announced that they would hold a meeting with the speaker of DPRD next day.

In Lamongan, on 17 February, students under Joko Tingkir Lamongan Students' Union organised protests at Lamongan regional government and Lamongan DPRD buildings. They were seen carrying flags and banners with inscriptions  ('Dark Indonesia') and  ('Lamongan Is Calling'). On 27 March, students protested at Lamongan DPRD, they were seen sticking posters, drawing on the roads, and burning used tires. The protest went chaotic at night, when the protesters clashed with policemen at KH. Ahmad Dahlan Road. They escaped into coffee shops and home yards to avoid the police chase, but later pushed into Lamongan Town Square intersection by the police. Following the event, 39 protesters were arrested, but immediately released to their families.

In Bondowoso, hundreds of students under  (PMII) protested front of the building of Bondowoso DPRD. They also carried banners and posters, burned used tires, and read the tahlil.

 Nusa Tenggara Islands 
All dates are in Central Indonesia Time (WITA; UTC+08:00).
In Denpasar, students under Bali Is Not Silent Alliance arrived at the building of Bali Regional House of Representatives on 11:30 a.m., and carried a banner with inscription , a play on Indonesian education motto . Ten minutes later, they were invited into the building's  (pavilion) by acting secretary I Gusti Ngurah Wiryanata to voice their demands. Students from Udayana University have announced plans for further protests on 31 March, following the emergence of an agreement letter between Indonesian Army and the university, which was perceived as a military attempt to intervene the education sector.

In Mataram, students' union of Mataram University (BEM UNRAM), stated that they would participate in protest on 20 February with president of the university's student union already departed to Jakarta to coordinate the protest with the one led by BEM SI. They carried a bier as a form of protest. On 25 March, hundreds of students under West Nusa Tenggara Students and Society Alliance, protested front of the West Nusa Tenggara DPRD building. Speaker of the legislature, Baiq Isvie Rupaeda, subsequently announced that their demands would be delivered to the central DPR.

In Kupang, students gathered in front off East Nusa Tenggara governor office, also known as Sasando Building to protest the budget cuts for education. On 24 March, students from Cipayung Plus Alliance protested front of the East Nusa Tenggara DPRD building.

 Kalimantan 
All dates in Central Kalimantan and West Kalimantan are in West Indonesia Time (WIB; UTC+07:00); and all dates in East Kalimantan, North Kalimantan, and South Kalimantan are in Central Indonesia Time (WITA; UTC+08:00).
In Pontianak, on February, dozens of students arrived at West Kalimantan DPRD for protesting. On 27 March, several students from Panca Bhakti University protested at West Kalimantan DPRD, but their demands were later responded by several parliament members.

In Palangka Raya, students from various local universities, mainly University of Palangka Raya (UPR), Muhammadiyah Palangka Raya University, State Islamic Institute of Palangka Raya, and State Hindu Institute of Palangka Raya, protested at the building of Central Kalimantan DPRD. They danced with Prabowo's campaign song Oke Gas 2 by Richard Jersey, as a form of political satire, while also burning used tires. Some protesters also shouted out  ('Bring Jokowi into Justice'). The students threatened the speaker of the Central Kalimantan province's parliament (DPRD) a second wave of protest in Monday with bigger mass if their demands are not met.
thumb|Universitas Ratu Samban (UNRAS) Students hassle with the police after attempting to plaster anti-government banners on the South Kalimantan DPRD, 18 February 2025
In Banjarmasin, hundreds of students, as well as the civil society, protested in front of the building of South Kalimantan DPRD. They criticised high public approval rates of the government by various survey results, and called them not in accordance with the realities.

In Kotabaru, on 30 March, dozens of people held a protest front of the headquarters of Military District Commando 1004, in support of the Armed Forces Law.

In Balikpapan, students under the Students' Alliance of the Oil City started a long march from four-way intersection at Balikpapan Plaza towards Balikpapan DPRD. After arriving at the building, it was marked by jostlings between protesters and policemen at the entrance door. They additionally criticised policies by the city's local government. The police dispersed them after exceeding the limit at 6:00 p.m., and later arrested 6 protesters, suspected of being provocateurs and against the officers.
thumb|273x273px|Rocky Gerung in 2020
In Samarinda, thousands of students protested in front of the East Kalimantan DPRD building. Political commentator Rocky Gerung gave a speech to motivate the protesters. The protesters clashed with the local police after attempting to enter the building, and they fired a water cannon on the protesters. As a result, the protesters were treated back to Samarinda Islamic Center Mosque. On 21 March, hundreds of students from various organisations protested front of East Kalimantan DPRD. They scattered flowers as a symbolism for dying democracy, and carried a banner in opposition to the ratification of revised Armed Forces Law.

In Tarakan, on 21 March 2025, Civil Supremacy Alliance, consisting of 11 students' institutions, held a protest in front of Tarakan DPRD during rains. It was also marked with burning of used tires. On 26 March, the alliance announced for further demonstrations, after DPRD did not respond to the ultimatum issued by them previous day. Previously, they held a consolidation meeting attended by 7 representatives from 5 students' organisations.

 Sulawesi 
All dates are in Central Indonesia Time (WITA; UTC+08:00).
 Makassar 
In Makassar, all of the following protests share very similar patterns, including burning used tires and blocking roads with a truck, effectively causing long traffic jams and creating tensions between protesters and drivers.

On 17 February, students protested at Perintis Kemerdekaan Road, effectively blocking the Trans-Sulawesi Road. They also burned used tires and held back a truck as a stage for protesters. A day later, students under AMPERA conducted protests at AP Pettarani Road, Rappocini. They also burned used tires and blocked the road with a container truck. Next day, students under Student Activists' Movement (GAM) also blocked the same road (AP Pettarani Road) with a truck and burned used tires. Another protest occurred at Sultan Alauddin Road, attended by students from Alauddin Islamic State University and carried various banners and pamphlets with critical messages. They also burned used tires.

Next day, Makassar Students' Alliance organised a protest under a flyover and then moved towards South Sulawesi DPRD building at Urip Sumoharjo Road. They also held two trucks as stages for the protests. Later, the protesters burned used tires, sang together "Buruh Tani" by Marjinal, and pulling the barbed wires. The protesters began to disperse at 7:05 p.m., and police chief of Makassar, Arya Perdana, claimed that their aspirations have arrived into South Sulawesi DPRD. However, as of 7:40 p.m., students from the State University of Makassar (UNM) and a group of drivers, were seen fighting each other using stones and bows. As a result, 6 people, accused of being provocateurs, were arrested by the local police while hiding within the campus of UNM, although they were later sent home by 4 a.m..

On 24 February, protesters from 16 organisations, including student elements, arrived below the flyover of Urip Sumoharjo Road at 12:45 p.m.. They also wore ropes on their left hands and prepared other attributes, including banners and a loudspeaker. Protests started at 3:35 p.m., and used tires were burned during the event. They began to disperse at 5 p.m..

On 19 March, protesters under Muslim Students' Association (HMI) protested front of South Sulawesi DPRD at Urip Sumoharjo Road. They additionally burned used tires and gave a speech at middle of the road. The protesters finally began to disperse on 05:41 p.m. after being accepted by parliament members.

 Other cities in Sulawesi 
In Palopo, non-governmental organisation Aspirasi held a protest front of Palopo mayor office on 29 March in support of Armed Forces Law.

In Kendari, students from Haluoleo University protested front of the building of Southeast Sulawesi DPRD, and 100 joint personnels were deployed to guard the protests. They rejected budget cuts in various sectors.
thumb|An image of a protester successfully overpowering a policeman in a duel atop a police truck in North Sulawesi became a rallying cry for continued protest, 20 March
In Manado, the student protesters under North Sulawesi Movement Alliance organised a sit-in. They blocked the 17 Agustus Road, precisely front of Samsat Office, effectively causing traffic jams. Hundreds of personnels were deployed by local police at the North Sulawesi Governor's Office, then the protesters attempted to break the entrance gate, tearing apart several pieces of iron. They also burned a bier and used tires. After waiting for three hours, they were finally permitted to enter the governor's office by Head of National and Political Unity Body of North Sulawesi, Johny Suak. Later on 20 March, students under North Sulawesi Forward Alliance protested at North Sulawesi DPRD building. After being unable to meet parliament members, they infiltrated barricades installed by the police and clashed with them, causing damage within the building. Clashes between protesters and policemen began at 05:30 p.m., and three protesters were arrested during the event.

In Palu, hundreds of students gathered in front of the Central Sulawesi DPRD, mainly from Tadulako University. The protest almost turned violent with students trying to get through the building gate. One student was injured in the head as the result of the commotion.

In Mamuju, West Sulawesi, protests also occurred in Simpang Lima road held by dozens of students who demanded the free nutritious meal program to be evaluated.

 Maluku Islands 
All dates are in Eastern Indonesia Time (WIT; UTC+09:00).
In Ambon, students from the State Islamic Institute of Ambon (IAIN Ambon), with their almamaters, protested in front of the Maluku DPRD building. The students rejected the free meal program and demanded the Presidential Instruction Number 1 of 2025 repealed while stating what Indonesia needs is free education.

In Ternate, hundreds of students gathered in front off the Ternate mayor office building and protested the free meal program by the government. The students laid out several demands such as free education, to repeal the Presidential Instruction Number 1 of 2025, allowances for teachers and university lecturers, as well as local issues such as demanding 50% reserved employment quota for women in the city government, rejecting land reclamation program in the city, and concern about the city's piped water infrastructure. The protest later turned violent with two journalists reportedly assaulted by the city's Municipal Police. The next day on 25 February 2025, journalists and media workers in the city held a separate demonstration condemning the assault. Alliance of Independent Journalists and Indonesian Union of Journalist's North Maluku chapter also condemned the incident as against freedom of press and a breach of laws.

In Morotai Island Regency, protest was held predominantly by Pasifik University (UNIPAS) in front off the regent's office and parliament building (DPRD). The students brought a banner written "Republik oligarki, Indonesia gelap, Malut butuh pendidikan gratis" (Oligarchic republic, dark Indonesia, North Maluku needs free education). The students criticized the free meal programs is ineffective and what Indonesian students need is free education.

 Papua 
All dates are in Eastern Indonesia Time (WIT; UTC+09:00).
In Manokwari, on 10 April, students' union of the University of Papua (UNIPA) held demonstrations at three separate places: the UNIPA campus, Mansinam hostel, and Makalo stop signal. The participants were guarded by Manokwari regional police, and they also carried several banners, such as  ('Armed Forces Law hastens genocide and ecocide in Papua'). During the event, two protesters were arrested by the police. The crowd negotiated with West Papua DPRD, , and the police. 

In Wamena, thousands of students held a demonstration as a form of rejection of the government's free nutritious meal (MBG) program on Monday, 17 February 2025. The students rejected the program, stating that what they need is instead free education and improvement on facilities. It is estimated that around 3,500 students participated, consisting of middle school, high school and university students. Thousands of students came from Wamena, Jayawijaya Regency and Yahukimo Regency, based on the police information. A riot occurred at around 09.00 WIT, when the crowd moved towards the Menara Salib located in front of the Jayawijaya Regent's office and took place on Hom-Hom Road, several hundred meters from the Jayawijaya regent's office.

In Paniai, thousands of students from all levels (elementary, middle school, high School and vocational school) held a demonstration against the free nutritious meal (MBG) program on Monday, 24 February 2025. They went to the Paniai Regent's Office in Madi Village,  and asked the government to prioritize free education.

In Deiyai, a Free Nutritious Meal (MBG) protest was held and attended by thousands of students from dozens of schools. They carried out a long towards the Deiyai regent's office. Wearing elementary, middle and high school uniforms, the students walked from the Tomas Adii Waghete Football Field at around 09.30 WIT to the regent's office.

In Jayapura, a protest action by students of the Cendrawasih University was carried out on Wednesday, 26 February 2025. They delivered their aspirations directly to the Papuan House of Representatives regarding the Law on the Indonesian National Army and demanded the repeal of the law.. On 7 April, students who are members of the central leadership committee of the Independent Forum of West Papua Students (FIM-WP) conducted a demonstration against PT Freeport Indonesia at Ekspo Waena and Perumnas III Waena, Heram District. This peaceful protest started from the Cenderawasih University campus and moved towards the Perumnas III taxi round. However, the protest was forcibly dispersed by joint TNI-Polri officers.

In Nabire, peaceful demonstration held by protesters who reject PT Freeport Indonesia. The protesters organised a long march to the office of the Central Papua Provincial House of Representatives. Unfortunately, the police forbade it because it would disturb public order. The demonstration lasted until it was forcibly dispersed.

 Overseas 
The earlier overseas protest were organised by group of Indonesian students studying at Columbia University in New York City under the name of Jong Columbia on 21 February from 4 p.m. until 6 p.m. in New Residence Hall, Teachers College, Columbia University which gathered more than 100 students. At the same time the leaders of Indonesian Students Union in Japan, Malaysia, and The Netherlands published an open letter expressing their solidarity with the student union protesters back home. The Indonesian diaspora in Germany has planned for solidarity protests at the Brandenburg Gate, Berlin on 1 March. Meanwhile on the same date, the Indonesian diaspora in Australia organised solidarity protests at the State Library Victoria, Melbourne, from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m.. Indonesian students in Columbia University would later return to protest against the revision of Armed Forces law in front of Teachers College.

 Reactions 
 Domestic 
 Protesters 
A lecturer of the Faculty of Economy and Business at the University of Indonesia (UI), Rizki Nauli Siregar posted the image above but with black background, while also supporting students in her class to participate in the protests. A lecturer of the Faculty of Social and Political Sciences at Gadjah Mada University (UGM), Subarsono, stated that a political demonstration is a sign of living democracy. Another lecturer of Faculty of Social and Political Sciences at UGM, Muchtar Habibi, claimed that the protests could be strengthened by widening its participation. Professor at Airlangga University, Henri Subiakto viewed the protests not just as a spontaneous movement, but also as a form of accumulation of their disappointment of political condition in Indonesia. He later agreed with Mahfud MD's statement that 'Indonesia is still dark'. Academic and historian Andi Achdian viewed them as a shock for Prabowo's government.

Rocky Gerung viewed that the protests were not just an expression of pessimism, but also as a reflection of the actual condition. He also later criticized Prabowo's response to the protests as insufficient and further highlighted Prabowo's rhetorics that continuously praised Jokowi as a sign of his undue influence on him. The fan club of South Korean boy band NCT, NCTzen, announced their support for the protesters, and they would provide free foods, drinks, and medical needs through crowdfunding (see #Jakarta). Fan club of another South Korean boy band Super Junior also similarly proposed such.

 Government 
thumb|Police stand guard at the Medan DPRD
During an exclusive interview on 7 April 2025, president Prabowo Subianto called out the demonstrations as a 'provocation', and alleged that foreign parties (such as USAID) funded them.

Head of the Presidential Communication Office, Hasan Nasbi, confirmed amidst the protests that funds allocated to the colleges,  for college, and scholarships will not be cut. Minister of the State Secretariat, Prasetyo Hadi, responded that Indonesia "is not really dark" as the slogan suggests, and called for the students to be optimistic. Vice Minister of Higher Education, Science, and Technology, Fauzan asked the student protesters to increase their intellectual abilities. The spokesman for the Presidential Communication Office, Adita Erawati, confirmed that a few demands presented by the protesters have been answered by the government, such as tuition fees not being increased nor scholarships being discontinued. Fellow spokesman Ujang Komarudin responded that Indonesia is still 'bright', not 'dark' as the slogan suggests. He also confirmed that there would be no cuts to scholarships, tuition fees would be not raised, and free health check would continue.

The speaker of People's Consultative Assembly (MPR), Ahmad Muzani, judged the public reaction during the protests as excessive and contraproductive. Deputy speaker of MPR, Eddy Soeparno called for the students to be optimistic and claimed that pessimism only brings the situation into a stalemate. The deputy speaker of House of Representatives (DPR), Adies Kadir, regarded the demonstrations as a form of creativity by the students to voice their aspiration. Luhut Binsar Pandjaitan, Chairman of the National Economic Council (DEN), responded to the #IndonesiaGelap hashtag, which was used by student demonstrators protesting various government policies. He argued that Indonesia has been progressing well, despite certain shortcomings, which he noted are not unique to the country but are also experienced by other nations, including the United States. Luhut rejected the notion that Indonesia is in a dire state and that the government is progressing well. He stated that the protesters are 'dark', and not Indonesia.

Anticipating the coordinated nationwide protests on 20 February which coincides with inauguration of regional heads elected from 2024 Indonesian local elections, Indonesian National Police (Polri) urged students to not stage any protests in the vicinity of the state palace or disrupt the inauguration ceremony.

Deputy speaker of the DPR, Sufmi Dasco Ahmad, viewed the protests against the Armed Forces Law as normal in a democratic country.

 Censorship and repression 
The government's reaction has also been marred by censorship, mainly targeting journalists and creative industry workers. It was widely reported that the Indonesian new wave duo Sukatani, who wrote a song criticising the police forces, was intimidated, and was later forced to make an apology video as part of the intimidation. American music critic Anthony Fantano condemned the repression, describing the situation as being "not good". Amnesty International also urged the Indonesian National Police to investigate the intimidation case. On X, a video surfaced showing a foreign citizen journalist being apprehended by police for "not having a permit".

There were also incidents of doxing of journalists following the protests at Jakarta on 21 February, causing condemnation by Legal Journalists' Union (Iwakum). CNN Indonesia, which is under the umbrella of Trans Media, was under public scrutiny for making two discrediting headlines against the protesters. In response to the headlines, two CNN Indonesia journalists were doxed by social media users sympathetic to the protesters, and several others called for a boycott of Trans Media-affiliated outlets.

After the storming of Fairmont Hotel, Commission for Missing Persons and Victims of Violence (KontraS) reported being terrorised by unknown assailants. KontraS vice coordinator Andrie Yunus stated that the unknown individuals had been frequently visiting their office and three KontraS staff members had received intimidating phonecalls.

Prior to the ratification of the Armed Forces law amendment, the parliament building and its surrounding areas were heavily guarded by armed forces and police forces.

Several media outlets in Indonesia reportedly received intimidation from the government officials. Kompas.com journalist Adhyasta Dirgantara reportedly received a death threat from the adjutant of the Commander of the Indonesian National Armed Forces after questioning the military's assault on the Tarakan police station. On 19 March, Indonesian magazine Tempo, known for its critical stance on the government, received a threat when a severed pig's head was delivered to its office in Palmerah, Jakarta, targeting journalist Francisca Christy Rosana. Editor-in-chief Setri Yasra condemned the incident as intimidation against freedom of the press. The next day, a journalist from the digital media outlet IDN Times was intimidated while filming the protest outside the parliament building. Several officers attempted to seize his mobile phone and motorcycle key. Two days later, Tempo received another anonymous package containing a box of six headless rats. As of 26 March, the Independent Journalists' Alliance had recorded that 18 journalists had become victims of violence during protests against the revision of Armed Forces Law. On 27 March, during the Jakarta protest, another journalist from Kompas.com, Rega Almutada, was intimidated and searched by individuals believed to be law enforcement in civilian clothing, while two other journalists from Russian media outlet RT were forced to turn off their cameras. In response to the threats against the press, Hasan Nasbi stated that the government remains committed to press freedom, but he soon faced criticism on social media for remarking that Tempo should cook the pig's head.

Additionally, there have been found incidents of intimidation against medical officers by policemen. Jakarta Legal Aid Institute alleged that the perpetrators would not be punished and the repressive approach had been intentionally designed inseparably from the police.

 Others 
There were calls to translate the hashtag into various foreign languages, such as English, French, Arabic, Japanese, Mandarin, as well as few regional languages such as Javanese. Actor and singer Angga Yunanda posted a tweet in support of the protests. Through hashtag  ('Artists Speak Up'), digital artists on Twitter (X) also gave support for the protesters. Meanwhile, in response to March protests, mural artists have followed suit to criticise the government. CEO of Malaka Project, Ferry Irwandi, viewed the protests as a 'concern and love in order to make Indonesia better'.

Senior activist Faizal Assegaf through his Twitter account, gave full support for the protesters in 'the fight against injustice, arrogance, authoritarianism, and intimidation', and shouted  ('Crush Jokowi'). He also countered Luhut's statement and called him not to intimidate the protesters. He later claimed that Prabowo's presidency could become 'meaningless' without Titiek Suharto, and this statement was criticised by the Love Prabowo Movement. Nusantara Youth Forum (FPN) called for his arrest at the headquarters of Polda Metro Jaya and Polri on 20 February.

The head of Love Prabowo Movement (GCP), Kurniawan stated that the student protests are a form of their aspiration, while also warning them not to be infiltrated by certain groups. Later, he alleged that the protests were an attempt to influence public opinion and to weaken Prabowo and the state by a handful of people. He also criticised that Faizal's statements could cause instability within the country. Dony Endrassanto viewed that Faizal's statements point to a coup d'État attempt and treason against the government. Meanwhile, Labour Party through its vice chairman Rivaldi Haryo Seno, issued a condemnation of police brutality during protests against revised Armed Forces Law.

Chairman of the Executive Council of Nahdlatul Ulama, Yahya Cholil Staquf, questioned what are the grounds to organise the protests. Vice secretary-general of Golkar Party, Sosialisman Hidayat Hasibuan, alleged that the protests are a form of political pressure on efforts by the government to arrest Hasto Kristiyanto, secretary-general of PDI-P. The head of media and opinion gathering at Golkar Party, Nurul Arifin, while suggesting that the protests could become a 'warning alert' for the government, she also reminded that ways to convey aspirations should be done constructively, not anarchistically. Mahfud MD claimed that there are so many 'bright' policies by the government, and need to be respected.

Chairman of Indonesian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Anindya Bakrie viewed the protests as normal in a democratic country. Former secretary of the Ministry of State-Owned Enterprises, , through his Twitter account, was confused why the  protests focused on toppling down Prabowo, not to bring Jokowi to justice, while according to himself, the condition was caused by Jokowi's faults. Policy observer Gigin Praginanto, through his Twitter account, satirised that the protests' theme should be better changed from  to  ('Indonesia Is Very, Very, Very Dark'). Actor Jefri Nichol said that he regretted for participate in a protest, the last one occurred in 2023, when he wasn't able to memorise any content of the chapters while being asked by a journalist.

There has been call from some internet users urging people to boycott celebrities and products that are supportive toward the government. Several state-owned enterprises such as Pertamina (which had found itself in an concurrent consumer boycott over allegations of adulterated fuel that surfaced during an corruption investigation) and three state-owned banks were also being targeted by the boycott movement. Few celebrities who are accidentally included in the list would later make clarification that they have nothing to do with the government programmes.

 International 
International non-governmental organization Human Rights Watch (HRW) issued a statement on 19 March condemning the passing of military law amendment for threatening human rights in Indonesia. HRW also urged the parliament to drop the proposed amendment that would enable military to fill the civilian positions in the judiciary and state-owned enterprises.

Amnesty International via its representative in Indonesia also criticised the passing of military law bill. Amnesty International then explained the danger of the military law that have been passed by the parliament and found misconducts within its passing. Earlier, Amnesty International secretary general Agnès Callamard visited Indonesia to evaluate the human rights situation in Indonesia.

Reporters Without Borders (RSF) through the director of its Asia-Pacific bureau, Cédric Alviani, has also issued condemnation of violence against journalists during Indonesian protests. Other international NGOs such as the German and Belgian chapters of International Federation of Action by Christians for the Abolition of Torture (ACAT), All Arakan Students' & Youths's Congress, Accountability Counsel, and Advocacy Forum-Nepal also published a joint statement condemning the passing of the amendment.

United Nations special rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders Mary Lawlor expressed her concern about repression against the human rights NGOs during the protest and urge Indonesian government to ensure the voice of civic organisations are guaranteed without repression.

 Impacts 
The student protests were featured as a front cover for the 18 February 2025 online edition of Lentera newspaper. As of 18 February, the rupiah began to weaken by 0.38% amidst the protests, however, the currency began to strengthen by 0.10% on 21 February. In response to the protests, there are currently attempts to counter  on various social media platforms through the hashtag  ('#BrightIndonesia'), originating from an Instagram account benpro.tv.

According to a senior researcher at Citra Institute, Efriza, predicted that then-Minister of Higher Education, Science, and Technology, Satryo Brodjonegoro could be replaced in a reshuffle due to the current student-led protests. This reshuffle was later confirmed and took effect on 19 February, with Brodjonegoro sacked from the position. Rocky Gerung, however, demanded to the government to give the explanation about his sacking, and claimed that the students' movement has been prepared months involving various experts.

On 21 March, seven students from the Faculty of Law at the University of Indonesia, submitted a judicial review on the revised Armed Forces Law to the Constitutional Court of Indonesia. They noticed numerous irregularities during its revision, deemed as 'unconstitutional' and 'hurried'. This move was soon followed by the Civil Society Coalition.

As the country situation doesn't show any sign of improvement, many young Indonesians have decided to flee the country to search for a new life as the government keep responding the protest in bad manners.

 Market crash 
thumb|Indonesia Stock Exchange Composite Index during closing around 9:37 AM on 18 March 2025
In March 2025, Indonesia's financial markets faced a severe jolt as the Jakarta Composite Index (JCI) plunged by over 7% in a single trading session. This sharp intraday decline—recorded on 18 March—was the steepest since 2011. The plunge triggered an automatic 30-minute trading halt as markets faced a decline of 6.146% during closure at around 9:37 AM, a mechanism designed to stabilize markets at 5% during periods of excessive volatility. After a 30 minute halt, trading resumed but the index continued to decline, reaching a 7.1% drop at one point. The sharp decline in Indonesia’s stock market quickly rippled across other sectors, with technology and manufacturing companies posting the biggest losses. Shares of , a leading provider of data center infrastructure, plunged around 20 percent, falling to 115,800 rupiah (approximately $7). Meanwhile, , a major player in energy and chemicals, saw its stock price drop nearly 19 percent by the afternoon. During trading, foreign investors made a net sell of IDR 2.48 trillion, continuing the trend of outflows totalling IDR 29.41 trillion since the beginning of the year. Foreign ownership in the JCI also fell to 2.9%, the lowest since 2011, reflecting a decline in global interest in the Indonesian market. This contrasted with other Asian bourses that rallied.  The negative market sentiment was fuelled by concerns over national economic conditions. The sudden downturn reflected a deepening crisis of investor confidence, rooted not only in macroeconomic uncertainties but also in political anxieties and shifting fiscal policies under President Prabowo Subianto’s administration. In February alone, the state budget (APBN) recorded a deficit of IDR 31.2 trillion, while the consumer confidence index and savings ratio fell, indicating weak purchasing power. Layoffs increased, with major factories such as Yamaha and PT Sanken Indonesia closing. Tax revenue also weakened, with Income Tax 21 falling 39.5% YoY and IPR declining by 0.5% signalling consumption pressure. Systemic risk looms over the capital market, given the potential impact on the financial sector. 

Although macroeconomic factors and controversial fiscal policies of the Prabowo Subianto administration were the main culprits, public discourse and political debates also highlighted the revision of the TNI Law (RUU TNI) as a factor that worsened market sentiment. According to a Tempo report, economist from CELIOS, Nailul Huda, stated that the decline in the JCI has been occurring since 14 March, and the TNI bill is one of the triggers. He highlighted concerns that the military's expanded role in the civilian and economic spheres could lead to legal uncertainty, erode meritocracy, and cause investor fear. One example is the appointment of an active military officer as President Director of Perum Bulog, which fuelled perceptions of military intervention in the business sector. Deputy Chairman of Commission I of the House of Representatives Budi Djiwandono immediately reassured and denied that the TNI Bill was the direct cause of the JCI crash, asserting that there are no articles in the revised draft that explicitly regulate the placement of active TNI officers in state-owned enterprises. On the other hand, economists such as Wijayanto Samirin cited the revision of the TNI Law as one of the five factors that caused the market crash, citing public concerns over the potential return of ABRI's dual function. This view reflects the market's sensitivity to the issue of militarisation, even if only as a perception.

The response from Indonesian authorities was swift but indicative of broader systemic stress. The Financial Services Authority (OJK) introduced temporary measures allowing publicly listed firms to buy back shares without requiring prior shareholder approval—a move aimed at supporting valuations and signaling confidence. Concurrently, Bank Indonesia intervened in the foreign exchange market to stabilize the rupiah, deploying a combination of rate tools and reserves. These interventions did moderate the pace of capital outflows but did little to resolve the underlying concerns surrounding fiscal direction and political stability. 

Amidst US President Donald Trump's reciprocal import duty policy has the potential to trigger foreign capital outflows from Indonesia, putting pressure on the rupiah exchange rate and stock market. Economist Bhima Yudhistira of Celios highlighted that this threat is exacerbated by proposed legislation such as the currently protested Police Bill and the Criminal Procedure Code (KUHAP) Bill, which may contribute to legal uncertainty and investor anxiety. He warned that these overlapping pressures could result in a trading halt in the stock market following the Lebaran holiday. Furthermore, the depreciation of the rupiah could drive up the cost of imported goods, particularly essentials and electronics, thereby triggering imported inflation and reducing the public’s purchasing power.